hello everyone i want to read a piece
that i recently wrote and i write these
so that i can think them through very
carefully by the way instead of just
reading them
or
spontaneously uttering them
sometimes that works but sometimes you
have to think things through more in
more detail this is about identity i
entitled it identity fixation
degenerate protestants
and two-year-olds
the great psychologist carl jung
believed that while the fundamental
threat posed to the integrity of the
catholic church
was associated with the temptations of
centralized power so the pull of
authoritarianism the threat to
protestantism
was unconstrained factionalism
jung believed that the logical
conclusion of the protestant revolution
was atomization
serious and wide-reaching enough so that
all those in the protestant world
would end up members of their own
personal church
the wars that currently rage in our
culture around issues of identity
can be profitably considered in that
light
the radical activists who purport to be
on the left and therefore standing for
the oppressed and marginalized
have attributed to each individual the
omniscient omnipresent and omnipotent
power
once reserved only for god
this attribution is most evident in
claims insisting
upon the unquestionable and purely
subjective nature
of identity
each individual is deemed uniquely
capable of defining who they are not
only for themselves but for other people
a capability increasingly enshrined in
punitive law
furthermore the epistemological grounds
for that claim
are equally if not more subjective
a person's identity is to be determined
by what he she or they or some other
pronoun variant feels
a philosophically preposterous claim to
say the least given the importance of
the issue at hand which is after all the
essential nature of a person
that vague and absolutely arbitrary
feeling is deemed to exist utterly apart
from any biological physical or even
social grounding
leaving the observer to wonder if it is
not at least implicitly regarded as the
manifestation of some disembodied soul
and furthermore can shift and change
with time
place and whim
in a manner also not to be questioned
this is all part of the philosophy of
the authentic self
also a doctrine of something
approximating the soul
where the genuine identity of the person
is held to be found
within
a very ill-defined locale
what is that neurological
spiritual
heavenly
and all social regulation of that
identity is held to be unacceptably
arbitrary punitive and compulsion based
and all biological determination of that
parodied as prejudiced
essentialism in the world where the
authentic self is the ultimate authority
only
the atomized individual rules
this insistence is reflected not only in
the observed doctrines of the
subjectively defined self
but also in the reconfiguration
of violence harm and offense
harm is held to be something only the
putative target of that harm can define
if i feel
that your words have hurt me
another feeling
then you are deemed
guilty
regardless of intent precedent or the
opinions of others who may very well not
agree
that a reasonable person would have been
hurt by the action or statement in
question
worse
all of this appears to be a consequence
of something approximating what freud
defined as fixation
that is failure to develop beyond a
given developmental stage or degree of
maturity
freud observed that when people hit an
insuperable obstacle in the development
of their personality
they tended to retain the patterns of
behavior that characterized their age
at the time of impediment
i learned to see this in my clinical
practice and then also in my private
life
now and then when i was discussing
something serious with one of the people
i worked with their entire yen would
shift
i remember in particular one woman
about 50 discussing an event that
occurred when she was about five
she'd been riding in a shopping cart
which her mother unfortunately left
unattended
on a slanted road
the cart sped down the road eventually
tipping spilling out my client
who then ended up in a hospital
where she was subjected to the tender
mercies
of a rather psychopathic nurse
when she told me this story her face and
her body positioning shifted
dramatically
it was as if her five-year-old self was
right there in front of me
i learned from this occurrence and many
others like it
to note very carefully any
discontinuities unpredictability or
oddities in the behavior of others
particularly if repeated and to observe
carefully
to determine the age of the spirit
inhabiting the misbehaving individual
sometimes i could bring that to the
attention of the person concerned
jung recommended giving such partial
immature spirits of possession names
to concretize their existence
to find out what they wanted in
imaginative discussion and to allow for
clearer conceptualization
of their existence
with regard to maturation
there is a large literature on the
development of early aggressive behavior
slash childhood conduct disorder slash
adult criminality
all part of the broad class
of anti-social personality disorder in
the psychiatric slash diagnostic
terminology
anti-social personality disorder
is a pernicious manifestation
harming both those who manifest it as
they tend to be impulsive and
self-destructive in their attitudes and
actions compared to those who have been
properly socialized
and posing the substantive danger to the
stability of social organizations that
criminals and worse clearly pose
the condition
really a pattern of perception and
action
makes itself manifest very early in life
and is characterized by both a
disheartening stability and longevity
as well as a remarkable resistance to
psychiatric or social remediation
there is a subset of children
overwhelmingly male who when grouped
with others of their age
tend to bite kick hit and steal
this proclivity
which characterizes about five percent
of males
is evident as early as two years of age
in fact
two-year-olds
are the most violent human beings
if you group children in peer groups
with others of their age the
two-year-olds manifest the most overt
aggression
relying on the compulsion of others to a
degree
not seen in more mature individuals
now
two-year-olds
are not very dangerous being small
physically
unprepossessing and soft so even when
enraged cannot pose much danger either
to themselves or others
and they are certainly capable of rage
there is little behavior more dramatic
than a full-fledged two-year-old temper
tantrum arms a kimbo prostrate on the
ground fists and legs pumping and
pounding face red tears of rage
sometimes accompanied by the remarkable
ability to suspend breathing until
unconsciousness
if you ever saw an adult manifest such
behavior you would be struck dumb and
never forget it and i have seen that
more times than i care to remember
clinical research has shown that
although these intrinsically aggressive
two-year-olds exist
and these are individuals who are
perhaps more aggressive than typical
even earlier than two for reasons that
may be primarily genetic but may also
indicate disturbances in the earliest
environment of relationship
most of them are socialized before the
age of four
a critical age for the instantiation of
such socialization
according
to the freudians
this means that they have developed a
superego
an internal representation of the
external social order
primarily inhibitory in its effects
that forestalls that aggression
this is generally what people assume
when they think of
self-control
that primordial urges
urges freud would have associated with
the id that primal repository of
animalistic motivation
have become subject to social control
compulsion
and repression
this
is not
what was posited by the great
developmental psychologist jean piaget
he had a theory of integration rather
than of inhibition
this is a crucially important
distinction a fundamentally vital
philosophical distinction
with profound implications for our
understanding of child development adult
behavior and social order
it
is of
vital importance that this dysregulated
and aggressive behavior be brought under
control
regardless for now of the nature of that
by the time a child is four
why
it is normal for two-year-olds to be in
piaget's terminology
egocentric
imagine that the child maturing from
birth to two
has a set of developmental requirements
in front of him or her
at birth the child is a somewhat
unspecified set of possibilities rife
with potential
but lacking integrated control and
physical skill the child has to learn to
move with ever greater degrees of
precision
gaining the ability to voluntarily move
arms and legs and then hands and fingers
and toes as he or she learns to reach
and grasp and walk and run and kick and
jump
the child also has to learn to integrate
across all those abilities so that he
can walk and chew gum say
at the same time
simultaneously he or she has to unify
a diverse set of fundamental
biologically predicated emotions and
motivations
circuits so to speak governing goal
directed action
response to damage danger and the
unknown food and water intake
temperature regulation rage exploration
interpersonal care
and play
this
is an incomplete list and its details
are subject to ongoing debate
it is an error
and a logical conclusion in some sense
of the essentially
insistence on the autonomy of the self
to assume that these diverse drives and
impulses are subject only to inhibition
as the individual matures that there is
a battle in the freudian sense between
the id and the super ego that all
socialization is essentially a
consequence of external compulsion
and that the social world is the enemy
of autonomy and freedom
how might the alternative be understood
as the infant matures towards his or her
two-year-old self
the various subsystems given at birth
and biologically instantiated organize
themselves
competitively and cooperatively into an
integrated hierarchy
with a goal
at least implicit
beginning to manifest itself at the
pinnacle
that goal
is full integration into society
and recognition by the others who make
up that society
of the value and worth of the integrated
individual
such integration occurs as a consequence
of the cooperation and competition that
makes up socialization itself
even breastfeeding is a negotiation
the child has to learn how to latch onto
the nipple without biting without too
much fuss
with a certain degree of cooperation
even in the face of hunger and
discomfort
the child is best served not only by its
demands
but by the impetus to maintain and
extend the developing mutual care-based
relationship with the mother
even those who might doubt such a thing
have had ample opportunity to observe if
they care to the proclivity for children
to burst into tears if surrounding
children do so
and to manifest distress in the face of
the distress of their mother
or father that empathy
is there very early
and is part of what regulates what might
be otherwise considered the more basic
and self-centered drive of hunger
the child must also learn how to balance
fear with the desire to explore
rage with the wish to maintain social
relations the same applies to exhaustion
and the narrow desire to dominate
most importantly with the wish
to continue
playing
by the time a child nears the end of his
or her second year of life
what might be described as the internal
hierarchical organization has made
itself manifest
the two-year-old is in some sense
internally consistent enough to be
somewhat autonomous
and to maintain enough balance across
emotions and motivations which can still
be powerfully disruptive to manage long
periods of voluntary exploration and
self-guided play
but two-year-olds
lack the ability to integrate across
others
piaget observed that two-year-olds
placed together
cannot really share
this is an average observation they
don't really play together either
each two-year-old quite likely to grab
and hoard toys for themselves plays with
said toys according to the dictates of
their individual imaginations
they are in their own subjective world
so to speak
and are as of yet unable to engage in
the true social play characteristic
of shared
pretense
let's pretend
their identities are defined
subjectively two-year-olds are
egocentric in the piagetian terminology
they will insist that the game
they have defined and fallen into
is the game that must be played
and they will become frustrated and
unruly if that egocentric play
is disrupted
around three
this changes
the properly developing child becomes
able to communicate well enough
to start to bring his or her own being
in line with that of another
one two-year-old might sit beside
another play independently with his
truck while his potential partner in
play imagines another game with a doll
now and then they might interact but
without attempting to bring their mutual
play worlds together
two
mature three-year-olds by contrast
can begin to negotiate
a shared play space
this is the beginning
both of mature identity
intensely social and thoroughly
negotiated in its nature and of
sophisticated social being
one might propose to the other you be
the daddy and all be the mummy and this
can be our house
each can then adopt that fiction as an
identity and play out the interaction
that exploratory play
is the child's primary form of thought
particularly in relationship to identity
and occurs almost entirely in a social
space
a well-developed child of three
can subordinate his or her impulsive
short-term drives
to the demands of a larger
more inclusive narrative
and can listen and take turns during the
game
as well as modifying his or her behavior
in response to the ongoing drama of the
pretend play
and there is little difference
except in degree
between successfully playing house as a
child of three to seven say
and doing the same
as an adult
the basic structure for the cooperation
and competition toward a shared end
the establishment of a peaceful loving
productive generous secure
and playful home
makes itself manifest at that early age
play is so crucially important to
children and so utterly engaging to them
because it constitutes a microcosm of
the expanded adult social world
the child who
by the age of four
insists
that only the identity has formulated
matters
and only the game that he wishes to play
is to be played
will find himself exceptionally
unpopular with his four-year-old peers
this is a complete catastrophe as the
primary agents of socialization for
children four years old and older
are other children
this means that the child who still uses
the strategies of a two-year-old at the
age of four
particularly if those strategies involve
the violence of that small percentage of
two-year-olds who spontaneously manifest
aggression
will be unable
to make friends
this means further that he or she will
basically be outcast alone frustrated
angry and arguably worse falling further
and further behind
comparatively speaking with every
passing month and year
the aggressive two-year-old who is still
kicking biting hitting stealing
having temper tantrums when frustrated
and is unable to adopt a negotiated
identity is all too frequently
a bully a narcissist a delinquent when
teenaged and then later
a criminal
the best predictor of adolescent and
adult criminal behavior is
childhood conduct disorder which is
characterized precisely by such
attributes evident upon further
exploration
at a very early age
identity
is negotiated plain and simple not
subjectively defined
for all of those who have matured past
the level of an egocentric and sometimes
violent two-year-old
and yet our society is increasingly
predicated upon the insistence that such
ego-centric definition of identity
must be accepted at face value with all
exceptions to that acceptance
punishable by law
there is nothing good about this for
anyone
the adolescents who insist that their
identity be subjectively defined and who
simultaneously toy with a fluid
self-description even at the level of
basic sex to say nothing of gender or
sexual attraction appear fixated at the
two-year-old level of development
they are ensconced in a subjective
solipsistic world of pretense which
operates independently of the concerns
of all others they insist
with all the egocentricity of a
two-year-old
that their opinion about their identity
regardless of whether that identity
constitutes a playable social game
voluntarily acceptable to others is to
be regarded as paramount with all
violations marked by what is essentially
a temper tantrum
and with all violators regardless of
intent another characteristic of
two-year-old thought to be punished as
perpetrators
why might this be
well first
children are now being born to adults
who are old enough by historical
standards to be grandparents
such adults are likely to be more
conservative and sheltering than younger
parents
they are also possessed of the resources
that make optimal deprivation for their
children difficult
if your family is wealthy why not shield
your children from all threat and pain
but therefore also from all necessary
challenge if your family is wealthy
why not give in to every material
request and fulfill every whim
particularly if accompanied by an
unpleasant emotional outburst easily if
only temporarily quelled by parental
submission
second
children are increasingly likely to be
only children
and it is highly probable that much of
the basic narcissism of the two-year-old
developmentally appropriate at two but
not thereafter is negotiated or even
pounded out by siblings who tend to be
very intolerant of excess self
absorption and attention seeking
third
parents are guilty
in this atomistic protestant slash
liberal sense believing at least
implicitly and often explicitly that any
restrictions placed on the development
of their darling will interfere with his
or her happiness which generally means
moment-to-moment emotional stability and
even worse
creativity
as if the relationship between
constraint and creative endeavor is
negative rather than positive even
though the latter is clearly and
demonstrably true
we are also likewise increasingly
required to believe and even sometimes
actually believe that all social
institutions are predicated upon
compulsion and the arbitrary expression
of power
and that the relationship between the
authentic and true individual and the
social world is fundamentally
antagonistic and something our children
must be protected from if they are to
develop fully
this extends even to the point of
skepticism about the utility and
necessity of so-called competitive games
as if it could be a game at all in most
cases without that necessary element of
competitive striving toward what is
after all the point or goal of the game
fourth
we surround our children with attention
attracting screams
from the time they are very young
onward
through their young lives
even when my wife and i had young
children and although we were both near
30 we were often the youngest parents
with the oldest children
the typical consequence of visiting
another couple with kids the same age as
ours was their immediate positioning in
front of a tv
so that they would not disturb the
adults for a few hours the kids should
have been tossed so to speak into the
basement together without anything
distracting
so that they became bored and frustrated
enough
to invent their own entertainment
which certainly would have entailed the
generation of the spontaneous and
mutually engaging drama
that constitutes
pretend play
we worry very much about the content
that children are exposed to on our
ubiquitous personal phones even
more invasive than the tv that everyone
worried about for decades
but it's not the content as marshall
mcluhan pointed out
it's the medium itself
what children are not doing when glued
to a screen is a more important
determinant of their now too often
pathological development then whatever
content they might be exposing
themselves to
there is no good evidence for example
that children who watch more violent
stories or play more violent video games
are driven towards violence by that
content
it is far more likely that kids with a
propensity for violence at age two say
are unlikely to mature out of that
propensity if their salutary play with
other children is constantly disrupted
by the presence of screens
fifth
and perhaps as a consequence of older
parents more resources and fewer
siblings
we radically privilege safety over play
exploration curiosity autonomy
and encouragement
this proclivity has been accelerated by
the rise of single mother families as
mothers are more likely to be concerned
about safety given the on average higher
levels of threat sensitivity
characteristic of women and less likely
to facilitate the forms of play that
appear risky in the short term
but which have marked advantages in the
broader social world and at more
sophisticated stages of maturity
this problem is exacerbated by the
broader scale shortage of male primary
school teachers the relative dearth of
males in positions that enable the
masculine socialization of children and
the high probability that in the case of
divorce primary custody will be awarded
to the mother
all of this is made worse
by the broad scale
of male patterns of child and adolescent
care that now characterize our society
none of this is remotely acceptable and
it is certainly not sustainable
the absence of father patterned
socialization is a complete catastrophe
for children as the clinical
developmental literature makes perfectly
clear
we have become so deluded in our
theories of identity that we now
privilege to use that hated word the
solipsistic self-pronouncement of
developmentally delayed adolescents
possessed though they are by the
necessity to frantically engage in the
kinds of pretend play they should have
been encouraged to manifest when
transitioning
from the age of two to three
this
impulse for pretense suppressed by
eatable helicopter parents
re-emerges with pronounced motivational
force and no shortage of moral outrage
when interfered with when those damaged
children escape from home to school or
university and get enough freedom to
embark upon their now terribly delayed
journey of maturation
they experiment with their gender
identity
even extending that into the world of
sheer make-believe
hence all the experiments with animal
and fictional identities in precisely
the manner of very young children
attempting to find their place in the
social world these attempts at identity
development
should be viewed with compassion
reflective as they are both of a very
disturbed society and more particularly
a very disturbed childhoods
but that does not mean that the identity
claims of exceptionally immature
adolescents
buttressed by the idiot intellectuals
who purport to serve as teachers and
guides
should now come to establish our social
norms
let alone our laws